<div class="item-page" itemscope="" itemtype="https://schema.org/Article">

<div class="page-header">

# Deployment Diagram: UML Tutorial with EXAMPLE

</div>

  - Details  
    <span class="icon-calendar" aria-hidden="true"></span> Last Updated:
    06 February 2020

<div itemprop="articleBody">

<div>

<div class="top-ads-boxes" style="float:left;padding-right:6px;">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1565016699961-0">

</div>

</div>

</div>

## <span id="1"></span>What is Deployment Diagram?

Deployment Diagram is a type of diagram that specifies the physical
hardware on which the software system will execute. It also determines
how the software is deployed on the underlying hardware. It maps
software pieces of a system to the device that are going to execute it.

The deployment diagram maps the software architecture created in design
to the physical system architecture that executes it. In distributed
systems, it models the distribution of the software across the physical
nodes.

The software systems are manifested using various **artifacts**, and
then they are mapped to the execution environment that is going to
execute the software such as **nodes**. Many nodes are involved in the
deployment diagram; hence, the relation between them is represented
using communication paths.

There are two forms of a deployment diagram.

  - Descriptor form
      - It contains nodes, the relationship between nodes and artifacts.
  - Instance form
      - It contains node instance, the relationship between node
        instances and artifact instance.
      - An underlined name represents node instances.

In this UML tutorial, you will learn,

  - [Deployment Diagram](#1)
  - [Purpose of a deployment diagram](#2)
  - [Deployment diagram notations](#3)
  - [What is an artifact?](#4)
  - [What is a node?](#5)
  - [How to draw a deployment diagram?](#6)
  - [An example of a deployment diagram](#7)
  - [When to use a deployment diagram?](#8)

## <span id="2"></span>Purpose of a deployment diagram

Deployment diagrams are used with the sole purpose of describing how
software is deployed into the hardware system. It visualizes how
software interacts with the hardware to execute the complete
functionality. It is used to describe software to hardware interaction
and vice versa.

## <span id="3"></span>Deployment Diagram Symbol and notations

![Deployment Diagram
Notations](./images/b0b6b2dee200a8c3636788fe85e5d48a34c1c6c8.png)

A deployment diagram consists of the following notations:

1.  A node
2.  A component
3.  An artifact
4.  An interface

## <span id="4"></span>What is an artifact?

An artifact represents the specification of a concrete real-world entity
related to software development. You can use the artifact to describe a
framework which is used during the software development process or an
executable file. Artifacts are deployed on the nodes. The most common
artifacts are as follows,

1.  Source files
2.  Executable files
3.  Database tables
4.  Scripts
5.  DLL files
6.  User manuals or documentation
7.  Output files

Artifacts are deployed on the nodes. It can provide physical
manifestation for any UML element. Generally, they manifest components.
Artifacts are labeled with the stereotype **\<\<artifact\>\>,** and it
may have an artifact icon on the top right corner.

Each artifact has a filename in its specification that indicates the
physical location of the artifact. An artifact can contain another
artifact. It may be dependent on one another.

Artifacts have their properties and behavior that manipulates them.

Generally, an artifact is represented as follows in the unified modeling
language.

![artifact](./images/d36f7996d2db305d95be5deb840c32a68b6c9fd7.png)

### Artifact Instances

An artifact instance represents an instance of a particular artifact. An
artifact instance is denoted with same symbol as that of the artifact
except that the name is underlined. UML diagram allows this to
differentiate between the original artifact and the instance. Each
physical copy or a file is an instance of a unique artifact.

Generally, an artifact instance is represented as follows in the unified
modeling language.

![artifact
instance](./images/2b963b90540ed7c48a438d169e95303bf4c20162.png)

## <span id="5"></span>What is a node?

Node is a computational resource upon which artifacts are deployed for
execution. A node is a physical thing that can execute one or more
artifacts. A node may vary in its size depending upon the size of the
project.

Node is an essential UML element that describes the execution of code
and the communication between various entities of a system. It is
denoted by a 3D box with the node-name written inside of it. Nodes help
to convey the hardware which is used to deploy the software.

An association between nodes represents a communication path from which
information is exchanged in any direction.

<div>

<div id="div-gpt-ad-9092914-1">

</div>

</div>

Generally, a node has two stereotypes as follows:

  - **\<\< device \>\>**
    
    It is a node that represents a physical machine capable of
    performing computations. A device can be a router or a server PC. It
    is represented using a node with stereotype \<\<device\>\>.
    
    In the UML model, you can also nest one or more devices within each
    other.
    
    Following is a representation of a device in UML:
    
    ![device
    node](./images/f19501072e35db5e40c473fae8ccde915ca5864e.png)

  - **\<\< execution environment \>\>**
    
    It is a node that represents an environment in which software is
    going to execute. For example, Java applications are executed in
    java virtual machine (JVM). JVM is considered as an execution
    environment for Java applications. We can nest an execution
    environment into a device node. You can net more than one execution
    environments in a single device node.

Following is a representation of an execution environment in UML:

![execution environment
node](./images/26daad68c7ef2bfb3ed90a333dd0562639393f29.png)

## <span id="6"></span>How to draw a deployment diagram?

Deployment diagram visualizes the topological view of an entire system.
It represents the deployment of a system.

A deployment diagram consists of nodes which describe the physical
devices used inside the system. On these nodes, artifacts are deployed.
We can also have node instances on which artifact instances are going to
be implemented.

Node and artifacts of a system participate in the final execution of a
system.

A deployment diagram plays a critical role during the administrative
process, and it must satisfy the following parameters,

  - High performance
  - Maintainability
  - Scalability
  - Portability
  - Easily understandable

Nodes and artifacts are the essential elements of deployment. Before
actually drawing the deployment diagram, all nodes and the relationship
between every node of the system must be identified.

You must know the architecture of a system, whether an application is a
web application, cloud application, desktop application, or a mobile
application. All these things are critical and plays a vital role during
the development of a deployment diagram.

If all the nodes, relations, and artifacts are known, then it becomes
easy to develop a deployment diagram.

## <span id="7"></span>Example of a Deployment diagram

Following deployment diagram represents the working of HTML5 video
player in the browser:

![Deployment
Diagram](./images/8296b1e6b78d3978634f10862d6ab44d414cc9db.png)

## <span id="8"></span>When to use a deployment diagram?

Deployment diagrams are mostly used by system administrators, network
engineers, etc. These diagrams are used with the sole purpose of
describing how software is deployed into the hardware system. It
visualizes how software interacts with the hardware to execute the
complete functionality.

To make the software work efficiently and at a faster rate, the hardware
also must be of good quality. It must be designed efficiently to make
software work properly and produce accurate results in quick time.

Deployment diagrams can be used for,

1.  Modeling the network topology of a system.
2.  Modeling distributed systems and networks.
3.  Forward and reverse engineering processes.

### Summary

  - The deployment diagram maps the software architecture created in
    design to the physical system architecture that executes it.
  - It maps software pieces of a system to the hardware that are going
    to execute it.
  - Deployment diagram visualizes the topological view of an entire
    system.
  - Nodes and artifacts are the essential elements of deployment.
  - Node and artifacts of a system participate in the final execution of
    a system.

Â 

</div>

  - [<span class="icon-chevron-left" aria-hidden="true"></span>
    <span aria-hidden="true">Prev</span>](/component-diagram-uml-example.html "Component Diagram: UML Tutorial with EXAMPLE")
  - [<span aria-hidden="true">Next</span>
    <span class="icon-chevron-right" aria-hidden="true"></span>](/best-uml-tools.html "BEST 28 UML Tools in 2020")

</div>
